# Disguised App Bundle Used for Delivery

The malware is delivered as an application disguised as an MS Office Word doc.

The previous research noted that the malware deploys a novel trick to prevent MS Office attempting to launch the disguised app as a doc by embedding a unicode character in the file name. This causes launch services to call “open” on the file rather than the default program for “.doc”.

On launch, the malware switches out the malicious application bundle for an actual MS Office doc: the same file name is used but now minus the hidden Unicode character. After the bait and switch, this doc is launched and presented to the user.

The whole trick is invisible to the user, who only sees a document appearing with the same name as the one they double-clicked on. Meanwhile, the second stage payload has been deposited in the /tmp folder and begins its run to install a hidden persistence agent and the third stage malicious executable.

# Shell Executable Contains Base64-encoded Mach-O

That trick is accompanied by the borrowing of a technique that has become popular among commodity adware and malware distributors; namely, using a shell script both as the main executable inside the app bundle and also as a vehicle to drop an embedded base64-encoded payload.

Note line 4, which defines a variable with around 850Kb of base64-encoded data. At line 40, that data is piped through the base64 utility for decoding, dropped in a subfolder in the /tmp directory, given executable permissions via chmod , and then launched as the 2nd stage payload.

Importantly, prior to line 40, the script takes measures to deal with two macOS security features: App Translocation and file quarantine. The former was a security feature brought in by Apple to prevent executables accessing external resources via relative paths and bypassing Gatekeeper checks. However, like Gatekeeper itself, App Translocation relies on the executable being tagged with the com.apple.quarantine bit.

In this case, the script agressively attempts to remove all quarantine bits and, in the event any of those fail and the malware finds itself translocated to a read-only filepath, it then undertakes a hunt for the original downloaded file via its MD5 hash and attempts to execute it from its non-translocated path on disk.

# Second Stage Payload’s Hidden Persistence Mechanism

The second stage payload, once dumped from the encoded base64, is a universal FAT binary containing Mach-Os for i386 and x86_64 architectures. The source code was written in C++.

As earlier research pointed out, this stage is responsible for dropping a persistence agent with the label of “com.apple.marcoagent.voiceinstallerd” and its program argument, “mount_devfs”.

However, we also note that this stage has code for testing the UID and determining whether the executable is being run as root or not. If so, the persistence mechanism is now written to /Library/LaunchDaemons instead of the user’s Library LaunchAgents folder.

In either case, the program argument is the same, pointing to a custom subfolder in the Library folder called “User Photos” and an executable, mount_devfs , which is similarly a universal FAT binary containing Mach-Os written in C++.

A further point not mentioned in the earlier research is that the Launch Agent or Launch Daemon is written using the “Hidden” flag so that users won’t see it in the Finder by default.

# Third Stage Payload and Hard-coded Calling Card

According to the earlier research, the malicious “mount_devfs” file provides the actors with backdoor capabilities, which include the ability to exfiltrate information as well as download files to the target machine.

For downloading, the actors make use of the same built-in dylib as we’ve seen used by Lazarus APT, libcurl.4.dylib .

The third stage payload has the ability to collect data regarding the device and its environment, including the computer host name.

Curiously, the sample has two hardcoded strings that presumably are meant as a “calling card” or have some internal meaning to the malware developers:
