# First stage
PipeMon’s first stage consists of a password-protected RARSFX executable embedded in the .rsrc section of its launcher. The launcher writes the RARSFX to setup0.exe in a directory named with a randomly generated, eight-character, ASCII string located in the directory returned by GetTempPath. Once written to disk, the RARSFX is executed with CreateProcess by providing the decryption password in an argument, as follows: setup0.exe -p*|T/PMR{|T2^LWJ*

Note that the password is different with each sample.

The content of the RARSFX is then extracted into %TMP%\RarSFX0 and consists of the following files:
- CrLnc.dat – Encrypted payload
- Duser.dll – Used for UAC bypass
- osksupport.dll – Used for UAC bypass
- PrintDialog.dll – Used for the malicious print processor initialization
- PrintDialog.exe – Legitimate Windows executable used to load PrintDialog.dll
- setup.dll – Installation DLL
- setup.exe – Main executable

Note that in the event of a folder name collision, the number at the end of the RarSFX0 string is incremented until a collision is avoided. Further, not all these files are necessarily present in the archive, depending on the installer.

Once extracted, setup.exe is executed without arguments. Its sole purpose is to load setup.dll using LoadLibraryA. Once loaded, setup.dll checks whether an argument in the format –x:n (where n is an integer) was provided; the mode of operation will be different depending on the presence of n. Supported arguments and their corresponding behavior are shown in Table 1. setup.exe is executed without arguments by the RARSFX, and checks whether it’s running with elevated privileges. If not, it will attempt to obtain such privileges using token impersonation if the version of Windows is below Windows 7 build 7601; otherwise it will attempt different UAC bypass techniques, allowing installation of the payload loader into one of:


depending on the variant. Note that we weren’t able to retrieve samples related to Interactive.dll.

This loader is stored encrypted within setup.dll, which will decrypt it before writing it to the aforementioned location.

# Persistence using Windows Print Processors
The location where the malicious DLL is dropped was not chosen randomly. This is the path where Windows Print Processors are located and setup.dll registers the malicious DLL loader as an alternative Print Processor by setting one of the following registry values: HKLM\SYSTEM\ControlSet001\Control\Print\Environments\Windows x64\Print Processors\PrintFiiterPipelineSvc\Driver = “DEment.dll” or HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Print\Environments\Windows x64\Print Processors\lltdsvc1\Driver = “EntAppsvc.dll”

depending on the variant. Note the typo in PrintFiiterPipelineSvc (which has no impact on the Print Processor installation since any name can be used).

After having registered the Print Processor, PipeMon restarts the print spooler service (spoolsv.exe). As a result, the malicious print process is loaded when the spooler service starts. Note that the Print Spooler service starts at each PC startup, which ensures persistence across system resets.

This technique is really similar to the Print Monitor persistence technique (being used by DePriMon, for example) and, to our knowledge, has not been documented previously.

Additionally, the encrypted payload, CrLnc.dat, extracted from the RARSFX is written to the registry at the following location, depending on the installer:

This encrypted registry payload is then loaded, decrypted and executed by the previously registered Print Processor library. The whole PipeMon staging and persistence is shown in Figure 1.


