

# Where it all starts: A poisoned code library

The attackers inserted malicious code into SolarWinds.Orion.Core.BusinessLayer.dll, a code library belonging to the SolarWinds Orion Platform. The attackers had to find a suitable place in this DLL component to insert their code. Ideally, they would choose a place in a method that gets invoked periodically, ensuring both execution and persistence, so that the malicious code is guaranteed to be always up and running. Such a suitable location turns out to be a method named RefreshInternal.


The modification to this function is very lightweight and could be easily overlooked—all it does is to execute the method OrionImprovementBusinessLayer.Initialize within a parallel thread, so that the normal execution flow of RefreshInternal is not altered.

Why was this method chosen rather than other ones? A quick look at the architecture of this DLL shows that RefreshInternal is part of the class SolarWinds.Orion.Core.BusinessLayer.BackgroundInventory.InventoryManager and is invoked by a sequence of methods that can be traced back to the CoreBusinessLayerPlugin class. The purpose of this class, which initiates its execution with a method named Start (likely at an early stage when the DLL is loaded), is to initialize various other components and schedule the execution of several tasks. Among those tasks is Background Inventory, which ultimately starts the malicious code.

The functionality of the backdoor resides entirely in the class OrionImprovementBusinessLayer, comprising 13 subclasses and 16 methods. Its name blends in with the rest of the legitimate code. The threat actors were savvy enough to avoid give-away terminology like “backdoor”, “keylogger”, etc., and instead opted for a more neutral jargon. At first glance, the code in this DLL looks normal and doesn’t raise suspicions, which could be part of the reason why the insertion of malicious code was undetected for months, especially if the code for this DLL was not frequently updated.

To have some minimal form of obfuscation from prying eyes, the strings in the backdoor are compressed and encoded in Base64, or their hashes are used instead.

# Initial reconnaissance

The Initialize method is the de facto execution entry point of the backdoor. It carries out several checks to verify that it is running in a real victim’s environment:
- It verifies that the process hosting the malicious DLL is named solarwinds.businesslayerhost.exe
- It checks that the last write-time of the malicious DLL is at least 12 to 14 days earlier
- It delays execution by random amounts of time
- It verifies that the domain name of the current device meets the following conditions: 
  - The domain must not contain certain strings; the check for these strings is implemented via hashes, so at this time the domain names that are block-listed are unknown 
  - The domain must not contain “solarwinds” 
  - The domain must not match the regular expression (?i)([^a-z]|^)(test)([^a-z]|$), or in simpler terms, it must not look like a test domain
- It checks that there are no running processes related to security-related software (e.g., Windbg, Autoruns, Wireshark)
- It checks that there are no drivers loaded from security-related software (e.g., groundling32.sys)
- It checks that the status of certain services belonging to security-related software meets certain conditions (e.g., windefend, sense, cavp)
- It checks that the host “api.solarwinds.com” resolves to an expected IP address

If any of these checks fail, the backdoor terminates. All these inspections are carried out to avoid exposing the malicious functionality to unwanted environments, such as test networks or machines belonging to SolarWinds.

# The backdoor

After the extensive validation described above, the backdoor enters its main execution stage. At its core, the backdoor is a very standard one that receives instructions from the C2 server, executes those instructions, and sends back information. The type of commands that can be executed range from manipulating of registry keys, to creating processes, and deleting files, etc., effectively providing the attackers with full access to the device, especially since it’s executing from a trusted, signed binary.

In its first step, the backdoor initiates a connection to a predefined C2 server to report some basic information about the compromised system and receive the first commands. The C2 domain is composed of four different parts: three come from strings that are hardcoded in the backdoor, and one component is generated dynamically based on some unique information extracted from the device. This means that every affected device generates a different subdomain to contact (and possibly more than one). Here’s an example of a generated domain:

The dynamically generated portion of the domain is the interesting part. It is computed by hashing the following data:
- The physical address of the network interface
- The domain name of the device
- The content of the MachineGuid registry value from the key HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Cryptography

The backdoor also generates a pseudo-random URI that is requested on the C2 domain. Like the domain, the URI is composed using a set of hardcoded keywords and paths, which are chosen partly at random and partly based on the type of HTTP request that is being sent out. Possible URIs that can be generated follow these formats:



Here are examples of final URLs generated by the backdoor:



Finally, the backdoor composes a JSON document into which it adds the unique user ID described earlier, a session ID, and a set of other non-relevant data fields. It then sends this JSON document to the C2 server.

If the communication is successful, the C2 responds with an encoded, compressed buffer of data containing commands for the backdoor to execute. The C2 might also respond with information about an additional C2 address to report to. The backdoor accepts the following commands:



In a nutshell, these commands allow the attackers to run, stop, and enumerate processes; read, write, and enumerate files and registry keys; collect and upload information about the device; and restart the device, wait, or exit. The command CollectSystemDescription retrieves the following information:
- Local Computer Domain name
- Administrator Account SID
- HostName
- Username
- OS Version
- System Directory
- Device uptime
- Information about the network interfaces

# Resulting hands-on-keyboard attack

Once backdoor access is obtained, the attackers follow the standard playbook of privilege escalation exploration, credential theft, and lateral movement hunting for high-value accounts and assets. To avoid detection, attackers renamed Windows administrative tools like adfind.exe which were then used for domain enumeration.

C:\Windows\system32\cmd.exe /C csrss.exe -h breached.contoso.com -f (name=”Domain Admins”) member -list | csrss.exe -h breached.contoso.com -f objectcategory=* > .\Mod\mod1.log

Lateral movement was observed via PowerShell remote task creation, as detailed by FireEye and Volexity:

Persistence is achieved via backdoors deployed via various techniques:


The backdoor also allows the attackers to deliver second-stage payloads, which are part of the Cobalt Strike software suite. We continue to investigate these payloads, which are detected as Trojan:Win32/Solorigate.A!dha, as the situation continues to unfold.
