# Sample Analysis

We identified two phishing documents: “Lockheed_Martin_JobOpportunities.docx” and “Salary_Lockheed_Martin_job_opportunities_confidential.doc”. Both variants were authored by the same user, named “Mickey”. The methodology used for control flow hijack and the macro content is similar across both samples.

The macro uses aliases to rename the APIs that it uses (fig. 2).

The initial entry point for the macro is via the ActiveX Frame1_Layout to automatically execute once ActiveX control is enabled (fig. 3).

The macro starts by loading WMVCORE.DLL, which is a legitimate windows dll for windows media. Interestingly, to make the macro seem more innocuous, Lazarus uses function names identical to the exported functions of WMVCORE.DLL and variable names thematically related to playback (fig. 4).

The macro uses a check for a document variable before entering its main functionality block. This variable is set at the end to ensure that subsequent opening of the document does not execute it again.

The second stage payload is shellcode that is embedded as a base64 encoded string array inside the macro that is decoded by using CryptStringToBinaryW (fig. 5). Other variants have used the UuidFromStringA function to decode the embedded payload and write it to an executable Heap.

The decoded shellcode then overwrites the WMIsAvailableOffline function from WMVCORE.dll by retrieving its address and changing its memory permissions.

The callback to the shellcode is achieved by retrieving the KernelCallbackTable pointer from the PEB structure of the current process via NtQueryInformationProcess, and then patching the _fnDWORD pointer to point to WMIsAvailableOffline. Whenever winword makes any graphical call, the shellcode executes. This technique to hijack control flow has also been used by other sophisticated attackers such as FinFisher. Lazarus has also used other novel methods to execute shellcode such as by using the function EnumSystemLocalesA as a callback to shellcode written to executable heap.

The macro then sets a document variable to ensure that subsequent runs would not execute the shellcode decode and the KernelCllbackTable hijack again. It also retrieves a decoy document from https://markettrendingcenter[.]com/lk_job_oppor[.]docx and displays it (fig. 7.)

The shellcode mainly sets up a periodic beacon out to https://markettrendingcenter[.]com/member[.]htm by creating a new staging folder C:\WMAuthorization , writing a vbs file (WMVxEncd.vbs) to it, and creating a corresponding Scheduled task to run the vbs file every 20 minutes (fig. 8). shellObj is the Wscript.Shell object that the vbs file uses to execute the beacon command.

Here, WMPlaybackSrv is a renamed wscript.exe and WindowsMediaPlayerVxEncdSrv is a renamed mshta.exe. Another variant of the campaign uses the lolbin wuauclt.


Earlier variants have used a copy of wmic.


Additional vendors have also identified a variant that uses pcalua.exe.

Unfortunately, we were unable to get further details about the remote htm payload as it returns a 404 error.
