# Behavior Overview

Upon execution, Sodinokibi will create a mutex with a hardcoded name Global\206D87E0-0E60-DF25-DD8F-8E4E7D1E3BF0 and decrypt an embedded configuration.

If the exp parameter in the configuration is set, the malware will attempt to exploit CVE-2018-8453 in order to gain SYSTEM privileges (see the “Privilege escalation” section for more details). If not configured to execute the exploit, or if the attempt is unsuccessful, it will instead try to re-run itself as an administrator.

Sodinokibi gathers some basic system information and saves it to the registry together with the generated encryption parameters. If the dbg option is not set in the config, the UI language and keyboard layout values are checked, and the malware will simply exit on systems which use one of the following language codes:

Code Language 0x818 Romanian 0x419 Russian 0x819 Russian (Moldova) 0x422 Ukrainian 0x423 Belarusian 0x425 Estonian* 0x426 Latvian* 0x427 Lithuanian* 0x428 Tajik 0x429 Persian* 0x42B Armenian 0x42C Azeri 0x437 Georgian 0x43F Kazakh 0x440 Kygyz 0x442 Turkmen 0x443 Uzbek 0x444 Tatar 0x45A Syrian 0x2801 Arabic (Syria)

The malware will exit only if the keyboard layout value belongs to these countries, but the OS language value is equal to one of the remaining languages.

If the system language is not one of the excluded languages, Sodinokibi will terminate all processes specified by the prc value in the config and delete volume shadow copies before starting the file encryption routine.

The ransomware will then proceed to encrypt all files on local drives, skipping files and folders included on the config’s exception list. Unless the executable was run with -nolan command line parameter, the malware will also attempt to encrypt files on network shares. The file encryption routine is discussed in detail in the “File encryption” section.

Each encrypted file will be renamed by adding a previously generated pseudo-random extension, which is stored in the rnd_ext value in the registry. A README file will be dropped in each directory and the background wallpaper will be set with a ransom message:


The contents of the README file, as well as the ransom message, are again specified in the config. The key requested by the attackers is a combination of the victim’s system information and generated encryption metadata (needed to derive the decryption keys for the files), AES encrypted and base64 encoded (see “File encryption” section for more details).

Other parameters from the configuration that affect the malware’s behavior are wipe (if set, all the files in folders listed under wfld will be zeroed out and deleted) and net (if set, the ransomware will broadcast the victim's system information to a range of domains listed in the dmn value in the config).

