# Arrival
The sample arrives as an app bundled in a Zip archive. It uses the icon for a Word document file as a disguise, attempting to pass itself off as a legitimate document file.

Another technique it uses to evade detection is adding special characters to its app bundle name. When a user looks for the fake doc folder via the macOS Finder app or the terminal command line, the folder's name shows "ALL tim nha Chi Ngoc Canada.doc" (“tìm nhà Chị Ngọc” roughly translates to “find Mrs. Ngoc’s house”). However, checking the original Zip file that contains the folder shows 3 unexpected bytes between "." and "doc".

The 3 bytes "efb880" is in UTF-8 encoding. According to UTF-8 mapping, the related Unicode code is "U+FE00".

"U+FE00" is a special Unicode control character with name variation selector-1, which provides the visual appearance of a CJK compatibility ideograph. In this case, the preceding character is the general character ".", so the variation selector does not change the visual appearance.

The operating system sees the app bundle as an unsupported directory type, so as a default action the “open” command is used to execute the malicious app. Otherwise, if the postfix is .doc without special characters, Microsoft Word is called to open the app bundle as a document; but since it is not a valid document, the app fails to open it.

Here is the code signing information for the app bundle sample.

The app bundle contains two notable files:
- ALL tim nha Chi Ngoc Canada: The shell script containing the main malicious routines
- configureDefault.def: The word file displayed during execution

When the shell script was run, it performed the following routines:
- Delete the file quarantine attribute for the files in "*ALL tim nha Chi Ngoc Canada.?doc*”
- Attempt to remove file quarantine attribute of the files in the system.
- Copy "ALL tim nha Chi Ngoc Canada.?doc/Contents/Resources/configureDefault.def(doc)" to "/tmp/ALL tim nha Chi Ngoc Canada.doc(doc)"
- Open "/tmp/ALL tim nha Chi Ngoc Canada.doc(doc)"
- Extract the b64-encoded fat binary to "ALL tim nha Chi Ngoc Canada.?doc/Contents/Resources/configureDefault.def(fat - binary)", which is the second-stage payload
- Change access permission of second-stage payload to execute the launch of the second-stage payload
- Delete the malware app bundle "ALL tim nha Chi Ngoc Canada.?doc"
- Copy "/tmp/ALL tim nha Chi Ngoc Canada.doc(doc)" to "{execution directory}/ALL tim nha Chi Ngoc Canada.doc"
- Delete "/tmp/ALL tim nha Chi Ngoc Canada.doc"

# Second-stage payload
When executed, the second stage payload (ALL tim nha Chi Ngoc Canada.?doc/Contents/Resources/configureDefault.def) performs the following malware routines:
- Drop third-stage payload to ~/Library/User Photos/mount_devfs
- Create persistence for the sample by creating ~/Library/LaunchAgents/com.apple.marcoagent.voiceinstallerd.plist
- Use the touch command to change the timestamp of the sample
- Delete itself

# Third-stage payload
In the third-stage payload (~/Library/User Photos/mount_devfs), the strings are encrypted with custom encryption using base64 encoding and byte manipulation.

Like older versions of the OceanLotus backdoor, the new version contains two main functions: one for collecting operating system information and submitting this to its malicious C&C servers and receiving additional C&C communication information, and another for the backdoor capabilities.

It collects the following information from the infected system by invoking the following commands:

The collected information is encrypted and sent to the malware C&C server.

It also receives commands from the same server.

Here are the C&C servers used by the malware:

The new variant’s backdoor capabilities are similar to those of the old OceanLotus sample, as detailed in the code excerpts below:

Below are the supported commands and their respective codes (taken from an earlier blog post that covered OceanLotus).
