# Case Summary

In this case, the actions began via a loader malware known as Bazar/Kegtap. Reports indicate an email delivery via malspam, which has been creeping up in volume over the month of September.

From the initial execution of the payload, Bazar injects into various processes including explorer.exe and svchost.exe, as well as, spawning cmd.exe processes. The initial goal of this activity was to run discovery using built in Windows utilities like nltest, net group, and the 3rd party utility AdFind.

After the initial discovery activity the Bazar malware stayed relatively quiet, until a second round of discovery the following day. Again, the same tools were employed in the second round of discovery, plus Rubeus. This time the discovery collection was exfiltrated via FTP to a server hosted in Russia. Next, the threat actor began to move laterally.

It took a few attempts, using various methods, from remote WMI, to remote service execution with PowerShell, until finally landing on Cobalt Strike beacon executable files transferred over SMB to move around the environment. From here forward, the threat actors relied on a Cobalt Strike beacon running on a domain controller as their main operations point.

After picking the most reliable method to move through the environment, the threat actor then proceeded to establish beacons across the enterprise. In preparation for their final objectives, they used PowerShell to disable Windows Defender in the environment.

The server utilized for backups in the domain was targeted first for encryption, with some further preparation completed on the host. However, once the Ryuk ransom executable was transferred over SMB from their domain controller (DC) pivot, it only took one minute to execute it.

At this point Ryuk was transferred to the rest of the hosts in the environment via SMB and executed through an RDP connection from the pivot domain controller. In total, the campaign lasted 29 hours–from initial execution of the Bazar, to domain wide ransomware. If a defender missed the first day of recon, they would have had a little over 3 hours to respond before being ransomed.

The threat actors requested 600+ bitcoins, which have a market value of around 6+ million USD.

# MITRE ATT&CK

Initial delivery was via email with a link to the Bazar/Kegtap backdoor loader. We downloaded and ran Document-Preview.exe, which connected to 5.182.210[.]145 over 443/https.

Service execution was used several times to execute scripts and executables during lateral movement.

WMI was used as well in an attempt to execute dlls laterally.



The threat actors also performed process injection.

Disabling Windows Defender.

# Day 1

AdFind and adf.bat were dropped and run minutes after Document-Preview.exe was executed. We’ve seen adf.bat numerous times and you can read more about it here. The batch file outputs information into the following text files.

Nltest was used to check for Domain trusts



Net was used to show Domain Admins



Ping was used to test if systems were up in the environment




# Day 2

Afind was run again, and then the threat actor attempted to Kerberoast using Rubeus.

After a few false starts during lateral movement failures, the threat actors performed some additional local system recon.

WMI was used to check for the current AntiVirus on numerous systems



# Lateral Movement

On day 1 the threat actors checked a domain controller for MS17-010 before continuing with more discovery. The system was not vulnerable to MS17-010

Lateral movement began around 28 hours after initial entry, using SMB to drop a Cobalt Strike Beacon on a domain controller. From there, the threat actor used WMIC to execute the beacon.



This payload did not appear to run successfully, as shortly after the threat actors dropped an additional payload on the beachhead host, and then executed a service on the DC, after no command and control traffic was apparent.

Following this, the treat actors copied and executed a Cobalt Strike beacon executable and initiated it via a service on the domain controller.

At this point, C2 connections appear on the domain controller connecting to martahzz[.]com – 88.119.171[.]75 over 443/https.

Backup systems were targeted for lateral movement using the SMB exe executed around one hour after the first lateral movement execution from the beachhead host.

The threat actor was having issues running beacons on numerous systems, and on at least one of the systems, they mounted the drive remotely.



Domain discovery (AdFind and Rubeus outputs) exfiltrated by vsftpd to 45.141.84[.]120.

SMB was used to transfer the Ryuk executables. Then, RDP connections were made from the first compromised DC, and then, ransomware executed throughout the environment, starting with the Backup servers. On the backup server, prior to execution, the threat actors pulled up the wbadmin msc console.

Commands ran prior to ransom execution

All systems were left with the following ransom note:

The threat actors asked for more than $6 million but were willing to negotiate.
