# Summary

FireEye has uncovered a widespread campaign, that we are tracking as UNC2452. The actors behind this campaign gained access to numerous public and private organizations around the world. They gained access to victims via trojanized updates to SolarWind’s Orion IT monitoring and management software. This campaign may have begun as early as Spring 2020 and is currently ongoing. Post compromise activity following this supply chain compromise has included lateral movement and data theft. The campaign is the work of a highly skilled actor and the operation was conducted with significant operational security.

# SUNBURST Backdoor

SolarWinds.Orion.Core.BusinessLayer.dll is a SolarWinds digitally-signed component of the Orion software framework that contains a backdoor that communicates via HTTP to third party servers. We are tracking the trojanized version of this SolarWinds Orion plug-in as SUNBURST.

After an initial dormant period of up to two weeks, it retrieves and executes commands, called “Jobs”, that include the ability to transfer files, execute files, profile the system, reboot the machine, and disable system services. The malware masquerades its network traffic as the Orion Improvement Program (OIP) protocol and stores reconnaissance results within legitimate plugin configuration files allowing it to blend in with legitimate SolarWinds activity. The backdoor uses multiple obfuscated blocklists to identify forensic and anti-virus tools running as processes, services, and drivers.

Multiple trojanzied updates were digitally signed from March - May 2020 and posted to the SolarWinds updates website, including: hxxps://downloads.solarwinds[.]com/solarwinds/CatalogResources/Core/2019.4/2019.4.5220.20574/SolarWinds-Core-v2019.4.5220-Hotfix5.msp

The trojanized update file is a standard Windows Installer Patch file that includes compressed resources associated with the update, including the trojanized SolarWinds.Orion.Core.BusinessLayer.dll component. Once the update is installed, the malicious DLL will be loaded by the legitimate SolarWinds.BusinessLayerHost.exe or SolarWinds.BusinessLayerHostx64.exe (depending on system configuration). After a dormant period of up to two weeks, the malware will attempt to resolve a subdomain of avsvmcloud[.]com. The DNS response will return a CNAME record that points to a Command and Control (C2) domain. The C2 traffic to the malicious domains is designed to mimic normal SolarWinds API communications. The list of known malicious infrastructure is available on FireEye’s GitHub page.

# In-Depth Malware Analysis

SolarWinds.Orion.Core.BusinessLayer.dll (b91ce2fa41029f6955bff20079468448) is a SolarWinds-signed plugin component of the Orion software framework that contains an obfuscated backdoor which communicates via HTTP to third party servers. After an initial dormant period of up to two weeks, it retrieves and executes commands, called “Jobs”, that include the ability to transfer and execute files, profile the system, and disable system services. The backdoor’s behavior and network protocol blend in with legitimate SolarWinds activity, such as by masquerading as the Orion Improvement Program (OIP) protocol and storing reconnaissance results within plugin configuration files. The backdoor uses multiple blocklists to identify forensic and anti-virus tools via processes, services, and drivers.

# Unique Capabilities
- Subdomain DomainName Generation Algorithm (DGA) is performed to vary DNS requests CNAME responses point to the C2 domain for the malware to connect to The IP block of A record responses controls malware behavior DGA encoded machine domain name, used to selectively target victims
- Command and control traffic masquerades as the legitimate Orion Improvement Program
- Code hides in plain site by using fake variable names and tying into legitimate components

# Delivery and Installation

Authorized system administrators fetch and install updates to SolarWinds Orion via packages distributed by SolarWinds’s website. The update package CORE-2019.4.5220.20574-SolarWinds-Core-v2019.4.5220-Hotfix5.msp (02af7cec58b9a5da1c542b5a32151ba1) contains the SolarWinds.Orion.Core.BusinessLayer.dll described in this report. After installation, the Orion software framework executes the .NET program SolarWinds.BusinessLayerHost.exe to load plugins, including SolarWinds.Orion.Core.BusinessLayer.dll. This plugin contains many legitimate namespaces, classes, and routines that implement functionality within the Orion framework. Hidden in plain sight, the class SolarWinds.Orion.Core.BusinessLayer.OrionImprovementBusinessLayer implements an HTTP-based backdoor. Code within the logically unrelated routine SolarWinds.Orion.Core.BusinessLayer.BackgroundInventory.InventoryManager.RefreshInternal invokes the backdoor code when the Inventory Manager plugin is loaded.

SolarWinds.Orion.Core.BusinessLayer.dll is signed by SolarWinds, using the certificate with serial number 0f:e9:73:75:20:22:a6:06:ad:f2:a3:6e:34:5d:c0:ed. The file was signed on March 24, 2020.

# Initialization

On execution of the malicious SolarWinds.Orion.Core.BusinessLayer.OrionImprovementBusinessLayer.Initialize method the sample verifies that its lower case process name hashes to the value 17291806236368054941. This hash value is calculated as the standard FNV-1A 64-bit hash with an additional XOR by 6605813339339102567 after computing the FNV-1A. This hash matches a process named "solarwinds.businesslayerhost".

The sample only executes if the filesystem write time of the assembly is at least 12 to 14 days prior to the current time; the exact threshold is selected randomly from an interval. The sample continues to check this time threshold as it is run by a legitimate recurring background task. Once the threshold is met, the sample creates the named pipe 583da945-62af-10e8-4902-a8f205c72b2e to act as a guard that only one instance is running before reading SolarWinds.Orion.Core.BusinessLayer.dll.config from disk and retrieving the XML field appSettings. The appSettings fields’ keys are legitimate values that the malicious logic re-purposes as a persistent configuration. The key ReportWatcherRetry must be any value other than 3 for the sample to continue execution.

The sample checks that the machine is domain joined and retrieves the domain name before execution continues. A userID is generated by computing the MD5 of a network interface MAC address that is up and not a loopback device, the domain name, and the registry value HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Cryptography\MachineGuid. The userID is encoded via a custom XOR scheme after the MD5 is calculated. The ReportWatcherPostpone key of appSettings is then read from SolarWinds.Orion.Core.BusinessLayer.dll.config to retrieve the initial, legitimate value. This operation is performed as the sample later bit packs flags into this field and the initial value must be known in order to read out the bit flags. The sample then invokes the method Update which is the core event loop of the sample.

# DGA and Blocklists

The backdoor determines its C2 server using a Domain Generation Algorithm (DGA) to construct and resolve a subdomain of avsvmcloud[.]com. The Update method is responsible for initializing cryptographic helpers for the generation of these random C2 subdomains. Subdomains are generated by concatenating a victim userId with a reversible encoding of the victims local machine domain name. The attacker likely utilizes the DGA subdomain to vary the DNS response to victims as a means to control the targeting of the malware. These subdomains are concatenated with one of the following to create the hostname to resolve:

Process name, service name, and driver path listings are obtained, and each value is hashed via the FNV-1a + XOR algorithm as described previously and checked against hardcoded blocklists. Some of these hashes have been brute force reversed as part of this analysis, showing that these routines are scanning for analysis tools and antivirus engine components. If a blocklisted process is found the Update routine exits and the sample will continue to try executing the routine until the blocklist passes. Blocklisted services are stopped by setting their HKLM\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\services\<service_name>\Start registry entries to value 4 for disabled. Some entries in the service list if found on the system may affect the DGA algorithms behavior in terms of the values generated. The list of stopped services is then bit-packed into the ReportWatcherPostpone key of the appSettings entry for the samples’ config file. If any service was transitioned to disabled the Update method exits and retries later. The sample retrieves a driver listing via the WMI query Select * From Win32_SystemDriver. If any blocklisted driver is seen the Update method exits and retries. If all blocklist tests pass, the sample tries to resolve api.solarwinds.com to test the network for connectivity.

# Network Command and Control (C2)

If all blocklist and connectivity checks pass, the sample starts generating domains in a while loop via its DGA. The sample will delay for random intervals between the generation of domains; this interval may be any random value from the ranges 1 to 3 minutes, 30 to 120 minutes, or on error conditions up to 420 to 540 minutes (9 hours). The DNS A record of generated domains is checked against a hardcoded list of IP address blocks which control the malware’s behavior. Records within the following ranges will terminate the malware and update the configuration key ReportWatcherRetry to a value that prevents further execution:

Once a domain has been successfully retrieved in a CNAME DNS response the sample will spawn a new thread of execution invoking the method HttpHelper.Initialize which is responsible for all C2 communications and dispatching. The HTTP thread begins by delaying for a configurable amount of time that is controlled by the SetTime command. The HTTP thread will delay for a minimum of 1 minute between callouts. The malware uses HTTP GET or HTTP POST requests. If the sample is attempting to send outbound data the content-type HTTP header will be set to "application/octet-stream" otherwise to "application/json".

A JSON payload is present for all HTTP POST and PUT requests and contains the keys “userId”, “sessionId”, and “steps”. The “steps” field contains a list of objects with the following keys: “Timestamp”, “Index”, “EventType”, “EventName”, “DurationMs”, “Succeeded”, and “Message”. The JSON key “EventType” is hardcoded to the value “Orion”, and the “EventName” is hardcoded to “EventManager”. Malware response messages to send to the server are DEFLATE compressed and single-byte-XOR encoded, then split among the “Message” fields in the “steps” array. Each “Message” value is Base64 encoded separately. Not all objects in the “steps” array contribute to the malware message – the integer in the “Timestamp” field must have the 0x2 bit set to indicate that the contents of the “Message” field are used in the malware message. Step objects whose bit 0x2 is clear in the Timestamp field contain random data and are discarded when assembling the malware response.

# Steganography

In observed traffic these HTTP response bodies attempt to appear like benign XML related to .NET assemblies, but command data is actually spread across the many GUID and HEX strings present. Commands are extracted from HTTP response bodies by searching for HEX strings using the following regular expression: "\{[0-9a-f-]{36}\}"|"[0-9a-f]{32}"|"[0-9a-f]{16}". Command data is spread across multiple strings that are disguised as GUID and HEX strings. All matched substrings in the response are filtered for non HEX characters, joined together, and HEX-decoded. The first DWORD value shows the actual size of the message, followed immediately with the message, with optional additional junk bytes following. The extracted message is single-byte XOR decoded using the first byte of the message, and this is then DEFLATE decompressed. The first character is an ASCII integer that maps to the JobEngine enum, with optional additional command arguments delimited by space characters.

Commands are then dispatched to a JobExecutionEngine based upon the command value as described next.
