# Initial Access

The actor has distributed its dropper embedded in an archive file (외교부 가판 2021-05-07.zip) as an attachment through spearphishing emails. The target email addresses have been collected using the actor email phishing campaigns we described in the previous section. The actor conducted this spearphishing attack on May 7, 2021.



The archive file contains a JavaScript file (외교부 가판 2021-05-07.pdf.jse) which pretends to be a PDF file that contains two Base64 encoded blobs. The first one is the content of the decoy PDF file in Base64 format and the other one contains the AppleSeed payload also in Base64 format (encoded twice).

At first it uses the MSXML Base64 decoding functionality to decode the first layer and then uses certutil.exe to decode the second layer and get the final ApppleSeed payload. The decoy PDF file has been decoded using the MSXML Base64 decoding function.



After decoding the PDF and AppleSeed payload, the content gets written into the ProgramData directory. At the end, the decoy PDF file is opened by calling Wscript.Shell.Run and the AppleSeed payload executed through PowerShell by calling regsvr32.exe. Calling regsvr32.exe to run a DLL registers it as a server that automatically calls the DLL export function that has been named DllRegisterServer.



# AppleSeed Backdoor

The dropped payload is a DLL file that has been packed using the UPX packer. The unpacked sample is highly obfuscated and important API calls and strings have been encrypted using a custom encryption algorithm. The encrypted version of the strings and API calls are in hex ASCII format. Whenever in the code the malware needs to use a string, it takes the encrypted string and passes it into two functions to decrypt it.

The first function "string_decryptor_prep" gets the encrypted string and then prepares a custom data structure that has four elements:




The second function "string_decryptor" gets the created data structure in the previous function and then decrypts the string and puts it in the same data structure.



The decryptor function first convert the input string in hex ascii format to binary by calling the hexascii_to_binary function on each two ascii characters (i.e. c3, 42, b1, 1d... in example 1). The first 16 bytes of in the input is then used as the key and the remainder is the actual value that gets decrypted in 16 byte chunks (i.e. ed, d5, 0d, 60).

Decryption is a simple xor operation of key[i] ^ string[i-1] ^ string[i] (For the first character string_to_be_decrypted[i-1] is set to zero).



Most of the important API calls resolve dynamically during the run time using "string_decryptor" function. (288 API calls have been resolved dynamically.)



The AppleSeed payload has an export function named "DllRegisterServer" which will be called when the DLL is executed using RegSvr32.exe. DllRegisterServer has a function that is responsible for performing the DLL initialization and setup that includes the following steps:

Copy itself into "C:\ProgramData\Software\ESTsoft\Common" and rename itself as ESTCommon.dll to pretend it is a DLL that belongs to ESTsecurity company.

and rename itself as to pretend it is a DLL that belongs to ESTsecurity company. Make itself persistent by creating the following registry key:

Registry key name: EstsoftAutoUpdate Registry key value: Regsvr32.exe /s C:\ProgramData\Software\ESTsoft\Common\ESTCommon.dll Registry location: HKLU\Software\Microsoft\Windows\CurrentVersion\RunOnce



Functionality activation by creating the following files into "C:\ProgramData\Software\ESTsoft\Common\flags" directory and writes "flag" into them: FolderMonitor, KeyboardMonitor, ScreenMonitor, UsbMonitor.

In the next step it creates a Mutex to make sure it only infects a victim once.



After creating that mutex, it checks if the current process has the right access privilege by calling GetTokenInformation API call and if it does not have the right privilege, it tries to escalate its privilege using AdjustTokenPrivilege by passing SeDebugPrivilege to it to gain system level privilege.



At the end it performs its main functionalities in separate threads. All the the collected data in each thread is being zipped and encrypted and is being sent to the command and control server using HTTP POST requests in a separate thread. After sending the data to the server, the data is deleted from the victim's machine.

The ApppleSeed payload is using RC4 for encryption and decryption of the data. To generate RC4 key, it creates a Random buffer of 117 bytes by Calling CryptGenRandom and then uses CryptCreateHash and CryptHashData to adds the buffer into a MD5 hash object. Then it calls CryptDeriveKey to generate the RC4 key.

The created 117 bytes buffer is encrypted using RSA algorithm and is sent to the sever along with RC4 encrypted data. The RSA key is in hex ASCII format and has been decrypted using "string_decryptor" function.

# Input Capture (KeyLogger)

The keylogger function uses GetKeyState and GetKeyboardState to capture the pressed keys on the victim's machine and logs all keys per process into the log.txt file.



# Screen Capture

This module takes screenshots by calling the following sequence of API calls and writes them to files: GetDesktopWindow, GetDC, CreateCompstibleDC, CreateCompatibleBitmap, Bitblt and GetDIBits and then writes them into a file using CreateFileW and WriteFile.



# Collect removable media data

This module finds the removable media devices connected to the machine and collects its data before sending it to the command and control server. To identify a USB drive it calls CM_Get_Device_IDW to retrieve the device instance ID that would be in format " <device-ID>\<instance-specific-ID> " and then checks if it contains USB string value.



# Collect files

This thread looks for txt, ppt, hwp, pdf, and doc files in the Desktop, Documents, Downloads and AppData\Local\Microsoft\Windows\INetCache\IE directories and archives them to be ready to be exfiltrated to the server.
