# Initial infection

In these campaigns, the most common infection vector is via Microsoft Word documents embedded with malicious macro code. The contents of the documents are in English and German depending on the target.



Malicious macro code is used to download a DLL file with .cab extension named “U.tmp” and saved into the temp folder.

DLL file download address: “hxxp://v0rzpbu[.]com/we201o85/aio0i32p.php?l=hopo4.cab”

After downloading the DLL, the code launches the malicious DLL using “regsvr32.exe”.



When executed, the DLL drops and launches using a WinExec API call. This stage of the Valak malware uses a malicious JavaScript file with a random name that changes per execution. In the example below the name of the JavaScript file is “sly4.0”.



# Multi-stage Attack: Step-by-step Analysis of Valak

# First Stage: Gaining Initial Foothold



The downloaded JavaScript code, “sly4.0”, contains a variable called “PRIMARY_C2” that holds multiple fake and legitimate domains, including Google, Gmail, Avast, and Microsoft. The domain list varies between samples.



Valak creates connections to the different C2 servers in the list with two predefined URIs:

One URI is used to download an encoded file named “project.aspx” [saved as project[1].htm].

*in version 30, the file was renamed to “rpx.aspx”.



One URI is used to download an encoded file named “a.aspx” [saved as a[1].htm].

*in version 30, the file was renamed to “go.aspx”.



Both files are decoded by the malware using Base64 and an XOR cipher. The key is a combination of a predefined string and information collected from memory during runtime.







The malware sets information like the C2 server, ID, the downloaded payload, and the decoded project.aspx in a registry key under “HKCU\Software\ApplicationContainer\Appsw64”. These keys will be used in the second stage.



After downloading the payloads and setting the registry keys and values, Valak sets it’s persistence via a scheduled task.



The scheduled task is set to launch wscript that executes JavaScript stored as an Alternative Data Stream named “Default2.ini” in the file “Classic2Application.bz”.



The script in the ADS (“Default2.ini”) executes the content of the registry key, “HKCU\Software\ApplicationContainer\Appsw64\ServerUrl”, which holds the contents of “project.aspx”, the second stage JavaScript file.



# Second Stage: Fetching and Executing Secondary Payloads

In the first stage, Valak laid the foundation for the attack. In the second stage, it downloads additional modules for reconnaissance activity and to steal sensitive information.

The two payloads (“project.aspx” and “a.aspx”) and the configuration in the registry keys are used in the second stage to perform malicious activities.



# Second Stage JS - Project.aspx

The “project.aspx”, or as we refer to it, the second stage JS, is a JavaScript file that looks very similar to the first stage JavaScript (“sly4.0”). However, on closer inspection it contains additional functions.

The script is executed by the scheduled task used to maintain persistence, with its main goal being:

Execute Pluginhost.exe, the plugin management component.

Download and parse additional payloads from the C2.

Save the payloads as Alternate Data Streams and set scheduled tasks to run them.







In the second stage, the configuration file has been altered to contain a unique “Client_ID” and a different file that it will try to download called “bounce.aspx”.

Stage 2 also contains three unique functions, “CreateExecJob”, “CreateOleExecJob” and “LaunchPlugin”.

These functions are called from the “ParseTask” function, and receive the parsed tasks from the C2.



If the malware downloads a payload that starts with the word “ODTASK”, it calls “CreateOleExecJob”, which writes the payload as an ADS of the file “C:\\Users\\Public\\PowerManagerSpm.jar” and creates a scheduled task “PerfWatson_%taskname%” to run it.



If the malware receives a content start with the word “PLUGIN”, it calls “LaunchPlugin”, which executes the PluginHost.exe file using WMI with the content as an argument.



If the malware receives a content starting with the word “TASK”, it calls “CreateExecJob”, which writes the content as an ADS of the file “C:\\Users\\Public\\PowerManagerSpm.jar” and creates a scheduled task “PowerUtility_%taskname%W” to run it.



Our analysis reveals that this time, the payload downloaded by Valak was IcedID. However, the payload can vary, as the attackers can download other payloads to the infected system.

In previous infections, Valak downloaded different remote administration tools like putty.exe and NetSupport Manager.



# PluginHost - a.aspx

The decoded “a.aspx” is saved in the temporary folder as %TEMP%\<ID>.bin. This file, internally named “PluginHost.exe”, is an executable file, and will be used to manage additional components.

Valak’s Modular Plugin Architecture

# PluginHost - Plugin Management Component

The functionality of the executable “PluginHost.exe” is divided into four classes: Bot, HTTPClient, Program and Utils, which will allow it to perform its main goal of downloading and loading additional components of the malware.

# The Bot Class:

The bot class is responsible for reading from several registry entries set by the first stage.

GetID() reads from the registry entry “ SetupServiceKey ”, which holds the ID.

”, which holds the ID. GetC2() reads from the registry entry “ShimV4”, which holds the C2 domain.

Both functions use the Utils class to read registry entries.


# The HTTPClient Class:

The HTTPClient class contains two functions, post and GetPluginBytes.

The GetPluginBytes() function gets the C2 domain using GetC2() and adds an embedded URI. The URL is used to download an additional module for the plugin.



# The Program Class:

The Program class contains the main function of the file main(). This function executes the function GetPluginBytes() to download the module components with type “ManagedPlugin”. These components will be loaded reflectively to the executable’s memory and expand the plugin capabilities.



# The Utils Class:

The Utils class contains several maintenance functions used by the other classes.

# ManagedPlugin - Plugins Suite for Enhanced Capabilities

When referring to additional plugins, it is worth noting that in early versions of Valak the plugins were downloaded by the second stage JS via PowerShell. More recent versions of Valak abandoned the popular yet easily detectable PowerShell downloader approach and transitioned to PluginHost as a means of managing and downloading additional payloads. This transition indicates that the Valak authors are looking for stealthier approaches and ways to improve their evasion techniques.

During this analysis, we discovered several different modules with the same internal name, “ManagedPlugin.dll”.

These modules are downloaded and loaded by “PluginHost.exe”.
- Systeminfo : responsible for extensive reconnaissance; targets local and domain admins
- Exchgrabber: aims to steal Microsoft Exchange data and infiltrates the enterprises mail system
- IPGeo: verifies the geolocation of the target
- Procinfo: collects information about the infected machine’s running processes
- Netrecon: performs network reconnaissance
- Screencap: captures screenshots from the infected machine





Among these components, some focus on one single, specific activity to achieve their goal and are relatively less robust than others when it comes to capability and potential impact. This includes ipgeo, procinfo, netrecon and screencap.





Below is a deep dive of “systeminfo” and “exchgrabber”, which are more advanced and complex than the aforementioned plugin components.

# MANAGEDPLUGIN: SYSTEMINFO, THE RECONNAISSANCE MODULE

“Systeminfo” shares many similarities to “PluginHost.exe” when it comes to class names. However, unlike “PluginHost”, it contains several reconnaissance functions that focus on gathering information about the user, the machine, and existing AV products.



The module gathers information about the user and attempts to verify whether this is a local admin or a domain admin. This shows that after infecting the machine, Valak chooses to target mainly administrators and domain admins. This indicates a propensity to target higher profile accounts such as enterprise admins.



The module attempts to find whether the infected machine has any security products installed using the AntivirusSoftware() function. The information collected about installed AV programs is gathered using the WMI query “SELECT * FROM AntiVirusProduct”.



The module also collects the physical address (MAC) and the IP address of the infected machine.



Additional reconnaissance activity occurs with several other functions, including:
- NetUser - provides more information about the user
- provides more information about the user SystemUpTime - records the amount of time the machine is running
- records the amount of time the machine is running WindowsVersion - determines the Windows version







In order to exfiltrate data, the plugin uses the function “post” in the HTTPClient class. “Post” gives the plugin the ability to upload content and exfiltrate data to the remote C2 whose domain is stored in the registry.



Similar to “PluginHost”, “SystemInfo” uses another function called GetQuery() that builds the URL to send the information to the remote C2. The URL is encoded using Base64 and some char replacements.



The core functionality of the “ManagedPlugin” module is in the “ManagedPlugin” class. The function loops endlessly and continues to execute the reconnaissance activity and send it to the attacker.



# MANAGEDPLUGIN: EXCHGRABBER - STEALER TARGETING ENTERPRISES
Exchgrabber, similar to systeminfo, shares some similarities with PluginHost when it comes to several function names like Bot, HTTPClient, and Utils; however, it has its own differentiated capabilities.

At first glance, the module appears to solely be used to steal credentials, which can be seen in several classes and data arguments with clear names like “Credential” and “CredentialType”.



The module handles its credential management in the class “Credential”, which includes several functions that handle the credential management activity and data types that will hold these credentials.

One of the most interesting functions in this class is “Credential” which receives four arguments: username, password, target, and CredentialType. It inserts these credentials into the respective module variable.

The “target” variable is used in the core ManagedPlugin function to store strings related to Microsoft Office applications.



Another interesting argument in the “credential” function is “CredentialType”. The type of credentials is determined by another part of the enum variable called “CredentialType”, which contains each of the credentials that the module will attempt to extract.

The credential types are sensitive information that can be extracted from the enterprise Microsoft Exchange server data, including Domain Password & Domain Certificate.

Extracting this sensitive data allows the attacker access to an inside domain user for the internal mail services of an enterprise along with access to the domain certificate of an enterprise. With systeminfo, the attacker can identify which user is a domain administrator. This creates a very dangerous combination of sensitive data leakage and potentially large scale cyber spying or infostealing. It also shows that the intended target of this malware is first and foremost enterprises.



When inspecting the core logic behind the class MainPlugin, it’s clear how each class collaborates with others to extract data from Microsoft Exchange and Outlook.

The module attempts to check if the extracted data is related to Microsoft Office or MS.Outlook. If so, it attempts to access the file “Autodiscover.xml” using the function GetFiles. “Autodiscover.xml” is a dynamically generated file that contains the data Microsoft Outlook needs to access the mailbox entered in the configuration wizard. The primary purpose of the Exchange Autodiscover service is to establish initial connections to Exchange user mailboxes. It then attempts to collect the AutoDiscover SMTP address of the dedicated exchange forest, and eventually puts all the extracted data in a variable called “text” .



After collecting the sensitive data, the module compresses it using Base64. This is a new feature of this specific module within the “Utils” class. Then, it sends the sensitive data to the attacker’s C2 with the POST function and an embedded URI.


