# Initial Access and Execution

While the use of malicious attachments in spam emails is the most common initial access vector — determined across multiple CrowdStrike investigations — the available data from these investigations had either been removed or “aged off” the systems (i.e., dispersed due to the passage of time) before CrowdStrike Services could confirm the source. In cases where spam attachments could be verified — once a user has opened the attachment and enabled macro functionality — a PowerShell script downloads either Emotet, Bokbot or Trickbot, with the end payload being TrickBot. Within hours of TrickBot being executed, additional TrickBot modules are installed for network reconnaissance and credential theft.

# Persistence

Trickbot is installed as a scheduled task, using names like “WinDotNet,” “GoogleTask,” or “Sysnetsf” to masquerade as legitimate-appearing processes. These point to various copies of TrickBot installed in the system, usually within the user profile under %USER_DIR%\AppData\Roaming\ or a subdirectory. The subdirectories also use similarly misleading names like “WinDefrag” or “NetSocket” to appear innocuous. TrickBot may also be installed as a service with names like “ControlServiceA” that points to a copy in the system drive root.

WIZARD SPIDER uses a module named NewBCtestnDll64 as a reverse SOCKS proxy that allows for the download and installation of the open source PowerShell Empire post-exploitation framework. These services launch a Base64-encoded PowerShell script that will fetch the full PowerShell Empire code from a remote IP. Each instance of the Updater service connects to a single IP address, and multiple versions may be added at the same time, pointing to different IPs and requesting a .php resource.

# Credential Access

The TrickBot module used for credential harvesting is pwgrab64 . As with all modules launched by the TrickBot core, pwgrab64 is installed into a subfolder, usually named either “modules” or “data,” and modified the following registry value:

Setting the “UseLogonCredential” value to “1” configures the Windows operating system to store credentials as cleartext in memory, where they can then be retrieved via the use of credential dumping tools. Older versions of the pwgrab module has a limited scope that targets mail clients, web browsers, FileZilla and WinSCP. Newer versions also dump passwords for applications such as PuTTY, VNC and RDP.

In the investigations reviewed by CrowdStrike Services, the UseLogonCredential registry value was observed having been set to “1” on systems throughout the infrastructure, often in conjunction with TrickBot’s first deployment to the host.

# Discovery

The TrickBot modules used for discovery include networkdll and psfin . TrickBot downloads modules for collecting local system information and scouting the network, primarily part of the networkdll module. This module has a battery of command line, WMI and LDAP queries to gather information, and then exfiltrate the data to GRIM SPIDER for review. The psfin module has a similar purpose but specifically searches for financial and point-of-sales indicators.

# Lateral Movement

Following initial access, GRIM SPIDER focuses on collecting credentials from the compromised hosts and uses existing RDP in an attempt to get a domain administrator account and access to the Windows Domain Controller. This process can take several iterations of harvesting credentials, connecting to new systems and establishing persistence. For the incidents observed, this stage of the attack can last from a few days to a few months.

GRIM SPIDER also has been observed selecting a server to be the primary staging point. Subsequently, the adversary copies the Microsoft SysInternals PSTools archive to this system, and executes PsExec.exe , a utility that allows them to move laterally and execute commands on other Windows systems within the infrastructure. Using this common administrator tool, GRIM SPIDER can traverse the network, remotely installing TrickBot and adding persistence to new targets. TrickBot also has the shareDll module for propagating to other hosts using the current, active user credentials.

# Deploying Ransomware

Once GRIM SPIDER has gained access to credentials and a Domain Controller, or other host management server, they would then stage the Ryuk ransomware on that system and deploy to targets via PsExec. Being the “noisiest” part of the operation, it is usually accomplished as quickly as possible to minimize chances of detection, as all of the necessary preliminary work has already been completed. In observed instances, the deployment and execution of Ryuk occurred in one session, typically lasting 3 to 8 hours.
