# The bear’s bait
At the end of August 2018, the Sednit group launched a spearphishing email campaign where it distributed shortened URLs that delivered the first stage of Zebrocy components. In the past, Sednit used a similar technique for credential phishing. However, it is unusual for the group to use this technique to deliver one of its malware components directly. Previously, it had used exploits to deliver and execute the first stage malware, while in this campaign the group relied entirely on social engineering to lure victims into running the first part of the chain. The screenshot in Figure 1 shows Bitly statistics for the shortened URL used in this campaign.




About 20 clicks were recorded on this link in the same week that the URL was created, and these presumably downloaded the target archive. Let’s keep in mind that this may mean fewer than 20 potential victims, as victims may have clicked on the URL twice, or maybe even more times, because the outcome was not what they expected… as we will describe below.

While ESET telemetry data indicates that this URL was delivered by spearphishing emails, we don’t have a sample of such an email. The shortened URL leads the victim to an IP-address-based URL, where the archived payload is located.

Unfortunately, without the email message, we don’t know if there are any instructions for the user, if there is any further social engineering, or if it relies solely on the victim’s curiosity. The archive contains two files; the first is an executable file, while the second is a decoy PDF document.




Note there is a typo in the executable’s filename; it should be “ДОВIДНИК” instead of “ДОВIДНIК”. Once the binary is executed, a password prompt dialog box opens. The result of the password validation will always be wrong, but after the apparent validation attempt, the decoy PDF document is opened. That document appears to be empty, but the downloader, which is written in Delphi, continues running in the background. The IP address is also used in the URL hardcoded into the first binary downloader.

# The bear’s lair
The Stage-1 downloader will download and execute a new downloader, written in C++, not so different from other Zebrocy downloaders. Once again this downloader is as straightforward as the Zebrocy gang’s other downloaders. It creates an ID and it downloads a new, interesting backdoor, (this time) written in Delphi.

As we explained in our most recent blogpost about Zebrocy, the configuration of the backdoor is stored in in the resource section and is split into four different hex-encoded, encrypted blobs. These blobs contain the different parts of the configuration.




Once the backdoor sends basic information about its newly compromised system, the operators take control of the backdoor and start to send commands right away.

Hence, the time between the victim running the downloader and the operators’ first commands is only a few minutes.

# How the bear hunts
In this section we describe in more detail the commands performed manually by the operators through their Delphi backdoor.

The commands available are located in one of the configuration blobs mentioned earlier (the “commands” blob in Figure 3). The number of supported commands has increased over time, with the latest version of the backdoor having more than thirty. As we did not identify a pattern in the order which the commands are invoked, we believe the operators are executing them manually.

The first set of commands gathers information about the victim’s computer and environment:


The commands above are commonly executed when the operators first connect to a newly activated backdoor. They don’t have any arguments, and they are quite self-explanatory. Other commands commonly seen executed shortly after these backdoors are activated, listed below:


Those who already have read our previous articles about Zebrocy will notice that more or less the same kind of information is sent, over and over again by previous stages. This information is requested within a few minutes of initial compromise and the amount of data the operator will have to deal with is quite considerable.

In order to collect even more information, from time to time the Zebrocy operators upload and use dumpers on victims’ machines. The current dumpers have some similarities with those previously used by the group. In this case, Yandex Browser, Chromium, 7Star Browser (a Chromium-based browser), and CentBrowser are targeted, as well as versions of Microsoft Outlook from 1997 through 2016:


These dumpers create log files indicating the presence or absence of potential databases to dump:


The current dumper contains the following output when there are no databases to dump:



These dumpers are quickly removed once they have done their job. Moreover, the backdoor contains a list of filenames related to credentials from software listed below (database names):

The operators take care of retrieving these databases if they are present on the victim’s computer.


The operators retrieve these files on the machine using the DOWNLOAD_LIST command. This command can be used when the operators are aware of the presence of interesting files on the computer.

Finally, depending on how interesting the victim is, they malware operators may deploy another custom backdoor. This backdoor is executed using the CMD_EXECUTE command:


There are some interesting facts here. First, they use COM object hijacking to make the malware persistent on the system even though the custom backdoor is installed only for a few hours. Second, the hex-encoded string is the C&C used by the custom backdoor while in the Delphi backdoor the C&C is embedded in the configuration.

The two Delphi backdoors, the common one and the one above, are quite similar but contain these interesting tweaks:


Once again, it’s not very clear what the purpose of this custom backdoor is. The detection ratio is definitely lower in comparison to the “usual” backdoor. The very short timeframe where this backdoor is on the system and operating makes it harder to retrieve. Once its operators complete their evil deeds, they quickly remove it.
