# Case Summary

The threat actors activity occurred in two bursts within a 3 day time frame. As with our previous case, they started by uploading their web shell and disabling antivirus services.

Soon after, they established two persistence methods. The first was through scheduled tasks, and the second, was via a newly created account. The account was then added to the “remote desktop users” and “local administrators users” groups. Like in the prior case involving ProxyShell, we observed a file masquerading as dllhost.exe that exhibited similarities to a proxy tool call Fast Reverse Proxy (with modifications) downloaded from the same IP as observed in the prior case and connecting to suspect domains.

After establishing alternative ways of re-entering the targeted host, they enumerated the environment using Windows native programs such as net and ipconfig. At the end of their first visit, they disabled LSA protection, enabled WDigest for access to plain text credentials later, dumped the LSASS process memory, and downloaded the results via the web shell.

All of this activity occurred over a time frame of around 2 minutes, leading us to assess that the entire attack was likely scripted out. The user agent strings of python-requests/2.26.0 and python-urllib3/1.26.7 also point to the use of scripts.

Two days later, we saw the threat actors reappear. We expected them to pick up where they left off, however, they repeated all previous actions. Due to the similarity between the commands and the sequential order they ran, this is additional evidence the threat actors employed automated scripts to execute these activities.

No further activity was observed as the threat actors were evicted from the network.

# Initial Access

As similarly seen in our previous report Exchange Exploit Leads to Domain Wide Ransomware, this threat actor utilized the Microsoft Exchange ProxyShell vulnerabilities; an exploit chain of 3 different CVEs:



With the appropriate PowerShell logging available we were able to recover the PowerShell commandlets executed on the Exchange server, which resulted in the creation of web shells on the host.

Once the threat actor had gained a valid privileged session using CVE-2021-34473 and CVE-2021-34523, they then ensured the default Administrator account had the correct role for mailbox importing and exporting:



The threat actor initiated a mailbox export that matched the search criteria of Subject -eq 'aspx_wkggiyvttmu' to a provided location with the .aspx extension. While the file created is a legitimate .pst file, in it contains plaintext web shell code that is rendered by IIS when requested.

In an attempt to hide the actions taken, the actor removes the request just created:



This activity then repeated approximately 2 days after the initial exploitation. As the actor had already achieved remote execution by this point, there is a high likelihood the exploitation of Exchange servers is automated. Below is the second web shell created that shares the same naming convention as the first.




# Execution

Approximately 20 seconds after the web shell aspx_wkggiyvttmu.aspx was created, a flurry of POST requests were sent to the web shell.

The web shell followed a similar structure seen in previous cases. At least two parameters are sent in the POST request to the web shell, delimiter which defines what string is used to separate the response, and exec_code which is the command to be ran. The web shell had predefined functions for special actions:
- get – Get file from location on disk (additional dst POST parameter)
- put – Upload file to location (additional dst POST parameter)
- run – Execute a list of commands separated by “;” using PowerShell.

If exec_code does not start with one of the above commands, it will simply attempt to run it with PowerShell.

The environment for this investigation had SSL inspection and PCAPs available for analysis which allowed us to see the commands being sent to the web shell itself. Below you can see an example of commands that were sent and the outputs they returned in the response.

The actor first uploaded a file Wininet.xml , which is later used to create a scheduled task, to C:\windows\temp using the put command of the web shell. This was followed shortly by several commands to impair Windows Defender before downloading and executing a fake dllhost.exe from 148.251.71[.]182.

Scheduled Task Commands:



Defender Modification Command: 


The schedule task runs a batch script called Wininet.bat which was also uploaded through the web shell. Wininet.bat simply loops through the execution of the file dllhost.exe .

The file dllhost.exe is a golang binary. When executed, the binary was observed resolving the following domains:


The binary also spawns the following commands when executed:



The binary has a low confidence reference to FRP (FastReverseProxy) as the sample matches the closed source Yara rule – HKTL_PUA_FRP_FastReverseProxy_Oct21_1 (by Florian Roth) however it does not behave in the same way as the open source tool. This file also matches on an additional Yara rule more recently – APT_MAL_Go_FRP_CharmingKitten_Jan22_1 pointing to the file including some code from FRP but otherwise having been modified for use by this threat actor.

# Persistence

The threat actor utilized both account creation and scheduled tasks to gain persistence in the environment.

# New account creation

During the first activity, we observed the use of user.exe executable that ran the following PowerShell command:




The first thing they did was make a new user named DefaultAccount with the password [email protected] . They then activated the account and changed the password ( [email protected] ) for the second time. Finally the commands added the new account to the Administrators group and Remote Desktop Users group.

The threat actors ran the same command again two days later:



Due to the close proximity between executed commands, we assess that the threat actors used tools to automate the execution and discovery phases of this attack.

# Scheduled task

As previously noted, we discovered the creation of a Scheduled task from a .xml template that was copied to the server via the web shell.

Below, we can observe the content of wininet.xml: 

The following commands where then ran to initiate the task and to achieve persistence:

# Privilege Escalation

The scheduled task created by the web shell was set to use the principal SID “S-1-5-18”, or SYSTEM.


# #Defense Evasion

Using PowerShell the threat actors issued several commands to impair Windows Defender including:

Windows Defender Behavior Monitoring was disabled.

The Severe Threat default action was set to ‘Allow’.

Realtime Monitoring was disabled.

The ‘C:\Windows’ path was excluded from scheduled and real-time scanning.

A rule was added to the Windows Firewall to allow remote RDP traffic.



Remote Desktop Services was started.



The threat actor enabled WDigest authentication. This enforces the storage of credentials in plaintext on future logins.



LSA protection was disabled.



# Credential Access

The threat actor created a process memory dump from LSASS.exe. In this case they created a “minidump” using the LOLBIN comsvcs.dll. This was dropped to disk as ssasl.pmd (lsass.dmp reversed) and then zipped before exfiltration.



# Discovery

The threat actors used native Windows binaries to enumerate the exploited server in an automated fashion. They executed commands such as:



These discovery tasks like the rest of the activity observed from this threat actor was executed via the web shell.

They used the PowerShell module Get-WmiObject to collect the name and IP address of the domain controller.



Additionally, we saw threat actors retrieving an email address from the compromised exchange server using the below command. This was likely done as a test.



# Collection

While having access to the Exchange server, we observed no attempts to export or access user mailboxes.

# Command and Control

As we saw from the execution section, dllhost.exe was used to access the below domains for C2, which we believe was using a variation of FRP.



This C2 channel was not used very much as most activity was done through the web shell.

# Exfiltration

The only successful data that was exfiltrated from the environment was the archive containing the LSASS dump.

Here you can see the threat actor using the web shell command to extract it:

# Impact

In this case, there was no further impact to the environment before the threat actors were evicted. Due to our previous report and OSINT research we believe with medium to high confidence that this intrusion would have ended in ransomware.


